===== PAGE 80 =====
 
79 
 
AUDITOSCRIPTS 
TEST 1 
PART 1 
WOMAN 
 
I’ve been meaning to ask you for some advice about restaurants. I need to book somewhere 
to celebrate my sister’s 30th birthday, and I liked the sound of that place you went to for your 
mum’s 50th. 
MAN 
The Junction. Yeah, I’d definitely recommend that for a special occasion. We had a great time 
there. Everyone really enjoyed it. 
WOMAN Where is it again? I can’t remember. 
MAN It on Grayson Street only about a two walk from the station 
WOMAN 
 
Oh that's good I prefer not to have to drive anywhere but I don't want to have to walk too far 
either. 
MAN 
 
 
Yes, the location’s perfect, but that’s not necessarily why I’d recommend it. The food’s 
amazing. If you like fish, it’s probably the best restaurant in town for that. It’s always really 
fresh and there are lots of interesting dishes to choose from But all the food is good there 
WOMAN Is it really expensive? 
MAN 
 
 
It’s certainly not cheap, but for a special occasion I think it’s fine It’s got a great atmosphere 
and before dinner you can go up on the roof and have a drink It’s really nice up there, but you 
need to book It’s very popular as the views are spectacular. 
WOMAN 
 
Sounds good. So that’s definitely a possibility then. Is there anywhere else you can think of? 
MAN If you want somewhere a bit less formal, then you could try Paloma. 
WOMAN Where’s that? I haven’t heard of it. 
MAN 
No, it’s quite new. It’s only been open a few months, but it’s got a great reputation already. 
It’s in a really beautiful old building on Bow Street. 
WOMAN Oh, I think I know where you mean. Right beside the cinema. 
MAN 
 
Yes, that’s it. I’ve only been there a couple of times, but I was really impressed. The chef used 
to work at Don Felipe’s, apparently. I was really sorry when that closed down. 

===== PAGE 81 =====
 
80 
 
WOMAN So is all the food they serve Spanish, then? 
MAN 
 
Yeah. You can get lots of small dishes to share, which always works really well if you’re in a 
group. 
WOMAN Hmm. Worth thinking about. 
MAN 
 
Yeah. There’s a lively atmosphere and the waiters are really friendly. The only thing is that 
you need to pay a £50 deposit to book a table. 
WOMAN 
 
A lot of restaurants are doing that these days. I should have a look at the menu to check if 
there is a good choice of vegetarian dishes. A couple of my friends have stopped eating meat 
MAN Not sure I say the selection of those would be quite limited. 
Before you hear the rest of the conversation, you have some time to look at questions five to ten. Now listen 
and answer questions 5 to 10. 
MAN I’ve just thought of another idea. Have you been to the Audley? 
WOMAN No, don’t think I’ve heard of it. How’s it spelt? 
MAN A-U-D-L-E-Y. You must have heard of it. There’s been a lot about it in the press. 
WOMAN I don’t tend to pay much attention to that kind of thing. So where is it exactly? 
MAN It’s in that hotel near Baxter Bridge, on the top floor. 
WOMAN Oh, the views would be incredible from up there. 
MAN 
 
Yeah, I’d love to go. I can’t think of the chef’s name, but she was a judge on that TV cookery 
show recently. And she’s written a couple of cookery books. 
WOMAN Oh, Angela Frayne. 
MAN That’s the one. Anyway, it had excellent reviews from all the newspapers. 
PART 2 
Hello and welcome. My name's Heather McCallum and I'm one of the potters who work here at Edelman 
Pottery. Before we go into the workshop, I just want to say a bit about the craft of pottery. Then we'll have a 
look at the equipment and you can try making a pot of your own. Like many people, I'm sure you know that 
pottery as an art form is tens of thousands of years old. And we know this because it stands the test of time. 
Things like baskets and pictures don't survive on the earth in the same way that pots do. and even if ancient 
pots are found in small pieces they still provide a lot of information about the past. There no doubt that 

===== PAGE 82 =====
 
81 
 
pottery has given archaeologists a fascinating insight into how ancient hills lived The shape of an artefact 
may have been lost but archaeologists can tell whether the pots were for, say, storage or cooking by 
examining the impressions on the clay, the scratches from tools, and the clay itself can reveal where the 
pots came from. When I ask people why they want to take a pottery class with me, they sometimes talk 
about these things. Like our ancestors, they hope that something they create will also last longer than they 
do, that their work, whether it is good or not, might say something about humanity many years after their 
death. Of course, you will all have your own reasons for coming here. As far as I'm concerned, what I love 
most is the concentration you need to make a good pot. That focus takes you away from the stresses of 
everyday life. If you're elderly, it's also good exercise for hands and wrists and helps with arthritis. And of 
course, it's a fun activity for children because it's so messy. Here at Edelman Pottery, we show you some of 
the basic pottery techniques so that you can use these to create whatever you wish. A gift for a friend, 
perhaps. Like nearly everyone who comes here, I'm sure this is the first time you will have tried the art so 
we'll keep things simple today. Now, before we move on, can I just say a word about what you're wearing? 
As we said in our email please remove any watches, necklaces etc and put them somewhere safe. If you 
have long hair do tie it back now. We provide aprons later but I trust your clothes are old but comfortable, 
not your favourite T-shirt or jeans.  
Before you hear the rest of the talk, you have some time to look at questions 17 to 20. Now listen and 
answer questions 17 to 20.  
So now we're in the workshop. Have a look around. There's a lot going on. To make pottery that will last, 
you need a potter's wheel, a kiln, which is basically a very hot oven where you fire the pottery, and some 
tools. So, first, the kiln. If you look over in the far corner, you'll see one of ours. Since their invention, kilns 
have changed very little, though in the past 20 years a lot of progress has been made in temperature 
control. Basically, a kiln removes the water from clay at temperatures of around 1000 degrees Celsius. This 
allows anything you've made to set permanently in shape. It's a pretty ugly heavy object that's hard to keep 
in a house or flat, so most people don't have one.  
You may think, can't I use my oven? Well, that's possible, but domestic ovens don't really get hot enough 
and eventually the clay will crack and fall apart. Some people fire pottery in a fire pit outside but bear in 
mind… that can be dangerous. You also need to know about safety procedures for kilns as they release 
toxic compounds into the air. Every potter needs a potter's wheel. This machine is used to shape the clay 
into an object with circular walls or sides, such as a bowl. Its invention revolutionised the pottery industry, 

===== PAGE 83 =====
 
82 
 
allowing multiple items to be produced in a day. Lastly, there are a number of different tools that potters 
use, depending on what they want to make. When you start, your hands can make all kinds of shapes and 
curves without relying on a sculpting tool. However, there are some basic tools that you will need to handle 
the clay on the wheel. Some look very strange and have even odder names that you may find hard to 
remember. Rather than go through them all now, I'll just name a few tools as we go along. We can provide 
these and I wouldn't recommend spending money on them yet. So, let's try making a pot of your own. If you 
sit down...  
PART 3 
TAMARA 
 
Shall we go through the notes we've made from our research into loneliness now, Dev? 
DEV 
 
OK, Tamara. It's been a real eye -opener. I had no idea that loneliness has been increasing 
steadily for the last 20 years. 
TAMARA 
 
I know. And it's the same all over the world. The downside of a modern lifestyle, I guess. 
DEV Did you come to any conclusions about what the reasons for the increase are? 
TAMARA 
 
Well, I'd assumed it was mainly an issue for the elderly, but in fact it's something which affects 
young people just as much. 
DEV 
So nothing really to do with longer lifespans. What about social media? In my case, far from 
making me feel isolated, it actually does the opposite. it? 
TAMARA 
 
It definitely does more good than harm. I'd say loneliness has a lot to do with the way cities are 
designed. People living in high flats with not much opportunity to speak to their neighbours 
DEV I think you right 
TAMARA 
 
Another possible reason is that people are having fewer children and don live in large extended 
family groups. 
DEV 
 
But in this country anyway, that all changed decades ago. And yet loneliness is a more recent 
problem. 
TAMARA 
 
I suppose so. A more plausible explanation is that people are having to move around for work 
and often end up living miles away from their family and friends. 
DEV That's true. 
TAMARA 
 
Looking at the studies on health risks and loneliness, there are claims that loneliness has as 

===== PAGE 84 =====
 
83 
 
much impact as smoking 15 cigarettes a day. 
DEV 
Or similar to the risks caused by obesity. But I'm not sure there's enough evidence for some of 
these claims. 
TAMARA 
 
Well, what about that one in Finland, which showed that loneliness increased the risk of cancer 
by about 10%? And those findings have been supported by other studies too. 
DEV 
 
You're right about that one. I was actually thinking of the studies on dementia. Some found no 
association between loneliness and dementia, and others found the opposite. 
TAMARA 
 
Not exactly reliable, then. There's been a lot of research on cardiovascular disease and whether 
loneliness contributes to that. 
DEV 
Yes, I read that it was hard to reach a judgment, as the definition of loneliness varied quite a lot, 
and the responses from participants were too subjective. But there's no doubt that loneliness 
contributes to a weakened immune system. 
TAMARA Unquestionably. The data on that is sound. 
DEV What did you think about the evolutionary theory of loneliness? 
TAMARA 
 
Well I thought the idea that loneliness evolved because it motivated people to be with other 
people is quite convincing. Survival often depended on group cooperation. 
DEV 
 
But I don think there is enough evidence to claim that there must be a group of neurons in our 
brains which influence social behaviour by making us feel bad when we're alone. 
TAMARA 
 
There are a few studies which support the theory, but not conclusively enough. More evidence is 
needed. 
DEV 
 
And anyway, this theory's not really useful when it comes to solving the problem of loneliness 
today. 
TAMARA True. 
Now listen and answer questions 27 to 30. 
DEV 
 
Should we look at the relationship between loneliness and mental health now? 
TAMARA 
 
OK. So, loneliness and depression are clearly related and that's been recognised by various 
governments around the world. But unlike depression, loneliness has no recognised clinical 
form. 

===== PAGE 85 =====
 
84 
 
DEV 
 
There's no available diagnosis or effective treatment and that's not likely to change. 
 
TAMARA 
 
I don't think so either I was thinking we should start our presentation with an example from our 
own experience I like to talk about how lonely I was when I started university being away from 
home for the first time and all that 
DEV 
 
Good idea. Everyone will be able to relate to that although a lot of students were probably too 
embarrassed to admit to it. 
TAMARA 
 
Yeah. We could discuss ways of dealing with loneliness as well, like just talking to strangers. 
DEV 
 
Loads of studies have shown that interactions with shop assistants and bar staff make people 
feel more optimistic and relaxed. 
TAMARA 
 
I don't know about that, but it must make people feel more connected with their community. 
DEV 
 
True, although you need to be a certain kind of person to be able to just strike up a 
conversation. 
TAMARA 
 
Good point. We should say something about solitude and how being alone and being lonely 
aren't the same thing. It's strange the way some people can't stand being by themselves while 
others love it. 
DEV 
 
Yeah, the research shows a certain amount of solitude is beneficial for wellbeing, which I 
appreciate, but being alone isn't something I actually like. I'd never choose to go on holiday 
alone, for example. 
TAMARA Me neither. 
DEV Well, let's not... you 
PART 4 
It's quite hard to think of a city that doesn't have a big river running through it. If you think about the major 
cities in the world, Shanghai, New York, Mumbai, London, they're nearly all built on rivers. When these cities 
were established hundreds or even thousands of years ago, the rivers were a big part of people's lives. In 
16th century London, the quickest way to get from one part of the city to another was by river. But people 
also used the river for fishing, as the water then was relatively clean, and they would also go on boat trips 
up and down the river just for pleasure, as a relaxing escape from the noise and bustle of the city streets But 
as industries developed and populations increased city rivers suffered The rising number of people meant 
there was a huge increase in the amount of sewage discharged into the rivers. Rivers had always been used 

===== PAGE 86 =====
 
85 
 
for this purpose, but when the number of inhabitants was so small, that wasn't such a problem. However, as 
cities grew to over a million inhabitants, the impact on the rivers became more serious. In addition, other 
types of pollution increased, as factories were built beside the river and discharged their waste materials 
into the water. This got worse over time. As recently as 1957, scientists at London's Natural History Museum 
declared that the River Thames was dead in biological terms, as the water was too filthy to support any kind 
of life. But in recent years, as rivers lost their industrial function, cities have begun to recognise their true 
value and to take steps to clean them up. For example, the River Thames is now cleaner than it's been for 
150 years. These days you can see seals swimming in the water, and recently people had to try to rescue a 
whale, which had got lost and swam up the river from the sea by mistake. Unfortunately, they didn't 
succeed, but the problem was disorientation rather than the quality of the water. Then, all around the 
world, riverside areas are now seen as prime sites for development. Warehouses that were once used for 
storing goods are now being converted into expensive restaurants and also into apartments with river 
views, which are in great demand and sell for astronomical prices. In Los Angeles, on the west coast of the 
USA, an architect has plans to revitalise the banks of the river and to make a park there which can provide 
facilities for sports as well as a natural environment for relaxing in It also hoped that the riverside can be 
used for other purposes It's been proposed that facilities could be provided for displaying projects related 
to various kinds of art that have been produced by local people, for example. In the city of Paris, During the 
summer months of July and August, all the traffic is banned from the roads by the sides of the river, and the 
banks are transformed into beaches, where people can relax in deck chairs under potted palm trees, 
sunbathe or buy a drink or a snack while enjoying the view. But to make the most of our rivers in our 
increasingly crowded cities, we need to allow them to regain their original purpose and be used as a means 
of transport, reclaiming our streets from cars and lorries. To do this, we'll have to shift more traffic back to 
the river, but this time cleanly and silently, making the most of modern technology. Already, more than two 
billion passengers use the ferry to travel in cities around the world, like Istanbul, San Francisco and New 
York, and these numbers are set to rise further. Admittedly, it's not a fast way of travelling, but neither is a 
car when it's stuck in traffic. Of course, passenger traffic on roads might decrease as more people start 
working from home, but another recent development, the huge rise in online shopping, has meant that 
another form of urban traffic just keeps on growing, and that's deliveries. Trucks and vans in the city pollute 
and double-park while dropping off parcels. Imagine using the immense capacity of shipping to take these 
trucks off the road. One freight barge can replace 44 large trucks, uses far less energy and causes less 
pollution When the barge docks at the riverside the parcels could be taken the last few kilometres to their 

===== PAGE 87 =====
 
86 
 
final destination on cargo bikes, electric ones of course. This is already happening in the Dutch city of 
Amsterdam, and in future the final stage could even be carried out by drone, although at present this isn't 
allowed. Wouldn't it be great to unblock our city centres in this way? Looking further ahead...  
  

===== PAGE 88 =====
 
87 
 
TEST 2 
PART 1 
WOMAN 
 
It's really good to see you, Tom. Since I had to give up work, I feel I'm losing touch with my 
friends and colleagues. 
MAN 
 
We really miss you in the office. We were all so sorry you had to leave. But you must be 
relieved to have more time to look after your mother. How is she? 
WOMAN Well she is very cheerful, but she needs a lot of help. 
MAN Have you tried to get any support from the local council? 
WOMAN No, I didn't know I could. 
MAN 
 
 
Yes, they offer different kinds of practical support. They realise that carers sometimes need 
time for all the other responsibilities they have, apart from the person they're caring for, and 
also that they sometimes need a break. 
WOMAN Absolutely. OK, so tell me more. How do I go about getting this support? 
MAN 
 
 
Well, you'd have to have an assessment of your mother's needs. That means someone would 
come round and talk to you about the situation and what you need. So, for a start, they'd want 
to know the amount of time you spend looking after your mother every day. 
WOMAN OK. 
MAN 
 
Then they'll probably ask you what sorts of tasks you do for your mother during the day. 
Things like if she needs help with getting dressed, for example. 
WOMAN 
 
Right. I help her with that. And also I help her get into the shower in the morning. 
MAN Yes, that sort of thing. 
WOMAN 
 
Yes, that's becoming a bit of a problem. She used to be very good at it, but not anymore. 
Before you hear the rest of the conversation, you have some time to look at questions five to ten. you Now 
listen and answer questions 5 to 10. 
MAN 
 
And be ready to tell them about anything you find particularly difficult about caring for your 
mother. 
WOMAN 
 
So, recently I've noticed she's started to have quite bad problems with her memory. If I wasn't 
there, I think she'd forget to eat, for example. And often she doesn't seem quite sure what day 

===== PAGE 89 =====
 
88 
 
it is. 
MAN 
 
Yes, tell them about that. And are there any physical difficulties you have caring for her? 
Lifting her, for example? 
WOMAN 
 
Yes, she's quite heavy and I'm afraid of hurting my back. I'd be in real trouble if that happened. 
MAN 
 
They can give you advice about that and also about how to avoid the possibility of your mum 
having a fall. 
WOMAN 
 
Great. So once they've done this assessment, if I'm eligible, what happens next? 
MAN 
 
Well, they might support you financially. So they might help you with transport costs, like if 
you have to get a taxi to take your mother for an appointment, for example. 
WOMAN I usually drive her myself, actually. So, could I claim the petrol? 
MAN You could. And you can claim for the insurance too. 
WOMAN Oh, right. 
MAN 
And if you need help with the housework, they can arrange for someone to come along once or 
twice a week. And one other thing. I hope you don't mind me saying this, but it important you 
look after yourself And it seems to me you under quite a bit of stress 
WOMAN I am yes 
MAN 
 
Well tell the council because they may be able to give you some advice on how to minimise it 
WOMAN 
 
Really? Though, actually, I feel so much better having talked to you. I'll get in touch with the 
council straight away. Now, shall we go for coffee or something? 
PART 2 
Good morning everyone. I'm Steve Wainwright from Elmley Town Council and I organise the town's 
volunteer scheme. I'm delighted you're all interested in joining the scheme. Our volunteers help to create a 
sense of community among the many people who live in our historic town of Elmley and make residents 
and visitors feel welcome at local events. First, I'll mention just a few of the activities that volunteers carry 
out. One is to walk around the town centre streets wearing our volunteer T -shirt. Tourists often ask how to 
get to a particular shop, and they might also be grateful for recommendations about what to visit. The town 
holds a large number of concerts each year and part of the volunteers' role is to get everyone in the 
audience to the right place as smoothly as possible. You'd be surprised how many people buy tickets, then 

===== PAGE 90 =====
 
89 
 
don't check them, and head for the wrong section of the hall. Volunteers may get involved with community 
groups, such as sports clubs or gardeners' associations. Here, the volunteers talk about how groups can 
help each other. For instance, a writing group might want to travel to another town to hear a talk by a well -
known author, but may not know that another club has a coach they could travel in. The town produces a 
monthly magazine, and anyone who lives in the town can send in articles. It's free to residents and is paid 
for by local businesses. That's the responsibility of the council's advertising department we depend on 
volunteers though to find out what people think of events they've attended and any suggestions they have 
for the future the volunteers then send a summary to the editors there are a number of clubs for retired 
people and every year the council arranges lunch for all the members the volunteers welcome the guests 
and when everyone's sitting down and relaxing after the meal, some volunteers put on a show. Usually 
around half an hour of songs and short plays, the club members really welcome the chance to chat to the 
volunteers at these events. The town council has a website, of course, and volunteers are asked to help by 
making sure residents know about it It updated every day with information about future activities and we 
want as many people as possible to use it  
Before you hear the rest of the talk, you have some time to look at questions 17 to 20. Now listen and 
answer questions 17 to 20. OK, now you know some of the things our volunteers do, I'll go on to some 
practical matters.  
As you probably know, the town arranges three major festivals every year, and they all depend on a large 
number of volunteers. The book festival lasts three days, and uses several venues which all need volunteers. 
More are needed for the music festival because that lasts a whole week, and even more help is required for 
the science festival, even though it's only two days long. It involves quite a lot of venues, though. It's a good 
idea to help at the festival you're most interested in, because you can attend most of the events for free. We 
try to use volunteers who are flexible, though, because some festival events are held outdoors and the 
weather may affect the size of the audience and even whether the event can take place so there can be 
changes at short notice What essential though is being able to get on well with other people and also to 
deal with someone who's behaving badly, as occasionally happens. Our plan is to get you all working in 
September, after a week's training starting on the 2nd, so we'll be timetabling you for duties the following 
week from the 9th onward. Later in the week beginning September 23rd we have a chat with each of you to 
find out how you feel about being a volunteer and what extra support you need. As a thank you to the 
volunteers we arrange an annual event. In recent years we've had a party in the Town Hall and last year a 

===== PAGE 91 =====
 
90 
 
barbecue in Chamber Park. Our forthcoming event is a trip along the canal from here to Dewhurst and back. 
It's on Saturday, September the 28th. And if you'd like to attend, you can sign up once you start work. Now, 
this is the Volunteer's T-shirt.  
PART 3 
ROSIE 
 
Colin, I'm really struggling to think of a topic for our human geography assignment. 
COLIN 
 
Me too, Rosie. I'll tell you what, let's think about the different aspects of human geography and 
see if we can narrow the topic down a bit to help us decide. 
ROSIE 
 
OK. So one aspect is population. That would be all about population density and migration and 
so on. Lots of facts and statistics. Maybe a bit boring? 
COLIN Yeah, but quite straightforward to find on the internet. 
ROSIE 
Suppose so. How about health? I'd never thought about the links between that and geography 
until Professor Lee gave us that lecture on cholera. How in the 19th century, a physician used 
street plans and plans of water supplies to find the source of a cholera epidemic. 
COLIN 
 
Yes, fascinating, wasn't it? Or we could do something more general like economies 
ROSIE 
 
So how financial and commercial factors are linked to the physical environment 
COLIN Yeah 
ROSIE I thought that had been taken off the syllabus for this year 
COLIN Has it 
ROSIE I not sure but it might be best to avoid it 
COLIN 
 
OK. Maybe we could do something on culture. We had that lecture about culture and geography 
last week. 
ROSIE 
 
I didn't get much out of that. It was all so general and the lecturer didn't give any useful 
examples. 
COLIN Yeah, I hardly took any notes. It didn't seem worth it. 
ROSIE Me neither. 
COLIN We could focus on poverty. That's something that's a global problem. 
ROSIE 
 
The trouble is, Dr Lee was saying, that you have to be careful with some of the figures relating to 

===== PAGE 92 =====
 
91 
 
poverty. They're sometimes deliberately manipulated. 
COLIN You mean the information gets changed for political reasons? 
ROSIE That sort of thing, yes. 
Before you hear the rest of the discussion, you have some time to look at questions 26 to 30. you Now listen 
and answer questions 26 to 30. 
ROSIE 
 
So what are we going to do our assignment on? I'll tell you what. One of the possibilities we 
have discussed is urbanisation and now over half the world population lives in cities. That really 
important 
COLIN OK good idea Rosie Let do that 
ROSIE I love living in a big city but of course there are problems 
COLIN Things like theft and robbery? 
ROSIE 
 
 
Yes, but where I come from, that's linked to another more serious issue, which is that a lot of 
people don't have jobs. That's getting worse and worse. And we also still have quite a lot of 
people who are homeless, though that's not quite so bad as it was. 
COLIN 
 
It would be nice to talk about some positive developments, like some of the new developments 
on the outskirts of cities. 
ROSIE 
 
Yeah, they've opened some massive new shopping centres outside my city. 
COLIN 
 
 
Yeah, the same with mine, but it means a lot of the shops in the city centre are closing down. But 
the outskirts are ideal for buildings that need a lot of space, like for conferences. They've 
opened a couple of big ones. 
ROSIE 
 
Yes, we've got some too. It'd be nicer to have more facilities for things like football too, but 
that's not happening where I live. 
COLIN Same in my area. 
ROSIE 
 
We could include something about developing disused industrial sites. It seems like a good idea 
because you're not doing any harm to the natural environment. 
COLIN Yeah, but aren't the buildings architecturally significant? 
ROSIE 
 
Not really. And what people forget is that they often used quite dangerous materials, chemicals 
and things, which haven't been properly cleared away, so the whole site has to be made safe. 

===== PAGE 93 =====
 
92 
 
COLIN Hmm, that can't be cheap. And I bet it's often not budgeted for. 
ROSIE You're right. 
COLIN Have you read about Masdar City? 
ROSIE 
 
In Abu Dhabi? Yes. It was designed to be a green city, wasn't it? That might be a good example of 
a city which set out to depend entirely on renewable energy. 
COLIN 
 
Yes we should say something about that It was designed to be totally pedestrianised too wasn't 
it with the transport underground 
ROSIE 
 
Yes and they had big plans for recycling to reduce waste to the lowest possible level But let's 
stick to talking about power sources. 
COLIN 
 
 
Then there's that ecotown in England, Greenhill Abbotts. It set out to conform to the usual 
principles, sustainability and so on. A lot of people were against it at first. They said the plans 
were unrealistic. I'm not sure how far they've got with it. I'll check. 
ROSIE Right. So it looks as if we have a sort of plan. 
PART 4 
There are trends in food much as there are trends in clothing. Interest in food fashions has risen rapidly 
since the birth of the smartphone when people first began taking photos of their food and instantly sharing 
them with their friends. The food industry in the UK in particular is obsessed with finding and exploiting the 
next big food trend. Marketeers aim to create a huge demand for a food item which was previously 
unknown or not needed. One of the most effective ways of promoting a new food product is by using social 
media influencers as brand ambassadors In return for free samples many influencers will post content 
about a product although there are influencers with hundreds of thousands of followers who can command 
large fees for their services Companies which sell vegan produce were pioneers in being able to increase 
sales really quickly in this way. For a food item to become really popular, it has to be readily available. So 
supermarkets have a role to play in creating a new food trend. They have dedicated teams closely following 
which new products or ingredients are trending on social media and are particularly interested in what 
well-known chefs are putting on their menus. I'd like to look at a few examples of marketing campaigns 
which were really successful in launching a new fashion trend. Starting in the 1990s with the avocado. A 
British PR company was hired to raise its profile and stimulate demand. They paid for a group of journalists 
to travel out to South Africa to meet avocado farmers. Articles written following this visit helped to educate 

===== PAGE 94 =====
 
93 
 
the British public about the avocado, which at this time was certainly not the daily staple it's since become. 
Advertisements were designed to promote the avocado as a superfood, rich in nutrients and therefore 
beneficial for health. Avocados became hugely fashionable, and within a few years UK avocado sales had 
grown from £13 million annually to around £150 million, making it one of the most successful fresh produce 
campaigns in UK history. Oat milk is a recent example of a new product which became fashionable very 
quickly. Now there are many brands available but one company which had early success was the Swedish 
brand Oatly They attracted a lot of attention with a media campaign which used provocation as a way of 
getting their message across effectively. The fact that this campaign aggravated competitors producing 
milk from dairy cows was seen as a plus, as it helped to make oat milk seem cool. In the USA, the brand 
decided against a big retail launch in favour of getting the product into coffee chains, which removed the 
need for a big advertising budget. This proved far more effective than offering samples in supermarkets. Oat 
milk had an advantage over other alternative milk products, such as almond milk. Many consumers prefer it 
because it has less of an impact on the environment. It requires significantly less water to produce than 
other alternative milk products and it also has a relatively low carbon footprint. Norwegian scray, a rarely 
available seasonal fish delicacy, otherwise known as Arctic cod, is now found on the menus of Michelin -
starred restaurants throughout Europe. The demand for Skre has been used by a food marketing agency to 
build the reputation of Norway's fisheries in general. Marketing surveys have shown that a significant 
number of shoppers now associate Norway with excellent seafood. Food trends can be considered a good 
thing in some ways, as they can benefit farmers and food producers enormously. The public can also be 
encouraged to buy things which are more sustainably produced. But ethical concerns have been raised 
about the effects a surge in demand can cause. Quinoa is a classic example. This plant is native to Peru and 
when demand peaked some years ago the price soared making it unaffordable for local people. While the 
popularity of quinoa has benefited farmers financially there have been other negative consequences. As 
demand grew, farmers began working the land all year round in order to produce more quinoa. One issue 
has been that the fertility of the soil decreased dramatically. which could potentially lead to desertification 
in some areas. Another example would be the case of...   

===== PAGE 95 =====
 
94 
 
TEST 3 
PART 1 
MAN Good morning 
WOMAN 
 
Hi, this is Michelin Meyer. I'm renting your house on Archwood Avenue. I'm due to move in next 
week. 
MAN Oh, yes. Hello, Ms. Meyer. What can I do for you? 
WOMAN 
 
When I viewed the house, I told you I'll most probably need to rent some furniture, at least until I 
know whether my temporary work contract is going to be made permanent. 
MAN 
 
Yes, of course. I remember. And I said I could give you some information about furniture rental 
companies in the city. 
WOMAN That's right. 
MAN 
 
Well, the biggest company is called Peak Rentals. I've recommended them to other people and 
have always heard positive reports about them. 
WOMAN Could you give me an idea of their costs? 
MAN 
 
Sure. I actually have one of their brochures here. It says the monthly price per room starts at 
$105 and goes up to $239. That depends on which rooms you need furniture for, of course. 
WOMAN 
 
Sure. It's just to get a general idea of how much it's going to cost. And you said you had some 
positive feedback about this company? 
MAN 
Yes. People have mentioned that the furniture from Peak Rentals is more modern than any of 
the other companies. And also, once you place an order, the furniture will be delivered to you in 
just one or two days. 
WOMAN That would be really helpful. 
MAN 
 
Oh, and the brochure says that there's a special offer at the moment. If you rent living room 
furniture, I believe that's a set of chairs and a TV table, you'll also get a lamp at no extra cost. 
WOMAN 
 
Okay, but you know, that price range you gave is more than I was hoping to pay. 
MAN Then you could try Aaron and Oliver. 
WOMAN Sorry, what and Oliver? 
MAN Aaron, double A-R-O-N 

===== PAGE 96 =====
 
95 
 
WOMAN OK, are they cheaper 
MAN 
 
I say they are a mid company But if you chose them you need to be aware that they charge an 
extra 12 every month in case of damage 
WOMAN Oh, I see. I'd have to do the math carefully then. 
MAN Right. But one helpful thing is that they also do cleaning for customers. 
WOMAN For the furniture? 
MAN For the house. 
WOMAN Oh, I see. I probably won't need that. 
Now listen and answer questions 6 to 10. 
MAN 
 
There's another company called Larch Furniture. It's quite new, and it has the lowest prices in 
town. That's for both furniture and also electronic equipment. 
WOMAN 
 
Well, that would be good. I'm not bringing much with me, and I won't have much time to go 
shopping after I start my job. 
MAN 
 
There are two things you need to know about large furniture. First of all you have to take out 
insurance on the furniture and you need to organize that yourself 
WOMAN That wouldn't be too hard. 
MAN 
 
Also you can take out a contract for less than six months but I figure that might not be a 
problem for you. You're renting the house for 12 months after all, aren't you? 
WOMAN Yes, okay. Well, I... 
MAN 
 
Sorry to interrupt. I just thought of another furniture rental company. It's called Space Rentals, 
and it's located very near to the house. 
WOMAN Okay. 
MAN 
 
I don't have any information about their charges, so it's best to use their app to find out what it 
would cost you to use them. 
WOMAN Okay, thanks. I'll do that. 
MAN 
 
One good thing about that company is that if you don't like the furniture once it's delivered, you 
can request exchanges, as long as you do that within a week of receiving it. 
WOMAN That sounds really great. Okay, well, thanks very much. That's so helpful 

===== PAGE 97 =====
 
96 
 
PART 2 
Hello, I'm Hayden. I'm one of the archaeologists investigating the site here at Bidcuster. This is the third 
summer for this community project, and most of the people digging here are volunteers. I'm a full -time 
archaeologist for the town council, but I was asked to join the project by NHA, a charity which sets up 
projects like this up and down the country. As you can see, we're next to Bidcaster Castle, which is great 
because the owners let us use their facilities. So, how did we get to where we are today?  
Many archaeology projects happen when an ancient object is found, and in our case that object was a gold 
coin. Coins are often found by people using metal detectors to look for things buried in the ground or coins 
are uncovered when wild animals like rabbits have been digging tunnels. Here, a walker found it on the 
ground after a rainstorm washed away some of the earth and sand. When the story of the gold coin hit the 
news,  
Peter Swift, an amateur historian, contacted me to say he believed there had been a village on this site, 
centuries before the castle was built. Just by chance, the team found some old maps and documents in our 
library, which showed 500 -year-old drawings of ruined buildings on the grassy area between the outer 
stone walls of the castle and the river. We knew then we were onto something. Over the three summers the 
team has been here, we've found the remains of several buildings, and more broken pots than you can 
count. Normally you'd expect to find brooches and other jewellery, but we're still waiting to uncover any 
such items. The people who once lived here were skilled at making tools from animal bones, as you'll see 
when you visit the exhibition. Besides the discovery of the village, we've also found evidence of human 
activity on the other side of the river. No other houses or huts so far, but we can see the borders of an 
ancient field system. At one point we found a long wall and thought it was an ancient palace, but it turned 
out to be a modern wall. This summer's work will end soon, but we'll be back next summer. In the 
meantime, we're putting on a series of guided tours for school groups this autumn. Oh, and maybe you saw 
the TV documentary about our project. That suggests the objects we've found are going to the town's 
museum, but we don't know that for sure yet.  
Before you hear the rest of the talk you have some time to look at questions 17 to 20 Now listen and answer 
questions 17 to 20.  
When you enter the site, please make sure you keep to the paths at all times. There are a few other things, 
the highlights of the site if you like, that I want to mention. Take a look at the map. Our present location is 

===== PAGE 98 =====
 
97 
 
marked at the bottom. This year, we've identified the foundations of an ancient bridge, and it's really 
exciting today because a team of divers are in the river searching for lost objects. To reach the bridge, take 
the main path ahead of you, go straight on, and keep going till the path bends to the left. You'll see a 
smaller track leading off to the right. Follow that to take you to the river, where the divers are. You might be 
interested to see the rubbish pit. This is very near the castle walls in the north -west corner of the site. It 
actually dates to the time of the castle and not the ancient village. We found oyster shells and fish bones, 
and we assumed they were thrown from the castle kitchen above. One area we excavated in the first 
summer uncovered the site of a meeting hall. We knew it was an important building because it had two 
rows of post holes, deep enough to support a large roof. It is the largest structure in the central area of the 
site next to the current excavation area. Last year we discovered a fish pond in the ancient village. Normally 
these were beside a river. The pond here is further away, but it's possible the river has moved slightly. 
Anyway, to get there from here, you turn right at the first information board you come to and follow the 
path into the trees. Before you come out of the trees, you'll see it on your right. If you reach the river, you've 
gone too far. So, does anyone have...  
PART 3 
MAYA 
 
So, Finn, I've done as much as I can for our project on theatre programmes. How's your research 
coming along? 
FINN 
 
OK, Maya. I didn't know theatre programmes are called playbills in the USA till I started looking 
into the topic. Even though I struggled to find many useful websites, I'm glad we picked this 
subject. No one else on the course is doing the same as us, although it is one of the research areas 
of the module convener. 
MAYA That might actually put some people off. 
FINN 
 
I suppose so. Anyway I hadn't realised there are actually companies specialising in creating 
theatre programmes 
MAYA 
Yes they are quite common nowadays. Contrary to what many people think, theatres don’t hire 
people to do the programmes. In fact, companies buy the rights to publish programmes on the 
theatre's behalf and then make their money selling advertising space within the programme 
booklet. 
FINN It must be easier for theatres to do it that way. 

===== PAGE 99 =====
 
98 
 
MAYA Yes. 
FINN 
I remember reading something about programmes in early British theatre. It said that the cast 
was always very important. 
MAYA 
 
Yeah, audiences were very familiar with leading actors and big names would draw huge crowds. 
FINN 
But I hadn't realised that if the programme named a famous actor, that's who the public expected 
to perform. And if that didn't happen, people accused the theatre of breaking their agreement 
with the audience. They would demand refunds and if they didn't get them, there were riots. 
MAYA Outrageous! That'd never happen now. 
FINN 
 
No, people are too polite, even when they're disappointed if the star of the show misses a 
performance. 
MAYA 
We should definitely include that information about early audiences in our project. I also think it's 
important to mention that lots of ordinary people at that time were illiterate, so theatre 
programmes were of limited value in advertising plays. When a company of actors arrived in a 
town, they'd parade around the streets in their costumes, beating drums and announcing their 
upcoming performances. 
FINN Interesting. I couldn't imagine that happening now either. 
MAYA 
 
There's also an interesting comparison to make between 18th and 19th century programmes. 
FINN 
 
Wasn't it in the 19th century that theatre programmes started to resemble programs today 
MAYA 
 
Yes and unlike programs from the 18th century they always used colour 
FINN 
 
And there was a greater variety of designs. But personally I think 18th century programmes were 
superior because they told the theatregoers so many things, including about the actors. 
MAYA And about the writer, the plot and sometimes the history of the play. 
FINN 
 
That's right. What should we say about theatre programmes in the 20th century? 
MAYA 
 
I reckon the most important thing is the dramatic change they underwent during World War II. 
FINN When the government imposed restrictions on the use of paper. 
MAYA 
 
Yeah, but that was only in the UK. In the USA, programmes, or rather playbills, continued to be 
published in the same format. 
FINN 
 
While here in the UK, programmes became merely a single sheet of paper folded to create four 

===== PAGE 100 =====
 
99 
 
pages for text. 
MAYA 
 
What I don't really get is that after the war they didn't go back to being more than one sheet or 
change in any way for over 25 years. I know there were paper shortages after the war, but only for 
five or ten years. 
FINN Strange. 
Before you hear the rest of the discussion, you have some time to look at questions 27 to 30. Now listen and 
answer questions 27 to 30. 
MAYA 
 
I got some pictures of programmes we could include on the slides for our presentation. 
FINN I found a couple too Maya. Let go through and see what we think 
MAYA Um oh this is an old one for a play called Ruey Blass 
FINN Never heard of that. But the programme looks very decorative. 
MAYA 
 
Good enough to put in a frame on the wall. The images are just beautiful. Finn, what did you find? 
FINN 
I've got some pages from a programme for Man of La Mancha. I thought this was a good 
programme to show, not because of the pictures, but because it contains articles written by 
members of the theatre company, so we can learn how the production was created and the 
thoughts and feelings of the cast. 
MAYA 
Good. I've got a copy of a programme that's now in a museum. It's for The Tragedy of Jane Shore 
and it's said to be the earliest surviving document to have been printed on Australia's first 
printing press 
FINN Fantastic! 
MAYA 
Another programme to talk about is for The Sailors Festival. It comes from the British Library's 
digitised collection of programmes that was started a few years ago. It already comprises over 
200,000 programmes which is amazing! 
FINN Huh. Wish I'd known about it while I was doing my research. 
PART 4 
It's only relatively recently that designers have become aware of the need to be inclusive when designing 
products. But what does that mean exactly? Well, it simply means designing products that span economic, 
social and cultural barriers. It means making sure products are accessible, so that as many different types of 

===== PAGE 101 =====
 
100 
 
people as possible can use them, without any type of adaptation having to be made to the original design. 
Inclusive design is often linked with universal design, although they are not quite the same thing. Universal 
design aims to make products that work for everyone and that includes considering the needs of people 
who have cognitive difficulties, which can present quite a challenge. Today examples of successful inclusive 
design can be seen all around us. In workplaces it is common to see desks which can be adjusted to suit 
people of different heights or for wheelchair users This still isn't always the case, however, and is one 
reason why office workers often suffer from back or neck problems. You'll find another example in the 
public toilets of countless hotels, airports and offices. Taps that you activate by sensor require no pressing 
or twisting movements. These are not only more hygienic, they're also easier for people with dexterity or 
mobility issues. The tech industry has been criticised in the past for focusing too much on young 
consumers, but this is changing. Many products are now designed with the elderly in mind. For example, it's 
well known that vision declines with age and that we also become worse at distinguishing between similar 
colours, in particular shades of blue, which is why software designers rarely create interfaces with this 
colour. Motor skills also decline with age and some people have difficulty doing everyday things like picking 
up a cup or opening a door. This can also affect their ability to use a mouse or keyboard. So voice access is 
now a routine way of making commands.  It's worth looking at the problems non -inclusive designs cause 
when not enough consideration is given to a range of users, as it can have a serious impact on people's 
lives. Access is one obvious example because it has such a huge impact on disabled people's independence. 
Not being able to access public transport because buses or trains are not wheelchair means many disabled 
people can go out unless someone goes with them. Safety is another issue. Inexplicably, most cars are still 
crash-tested using a dummy based on an average -sized male. This has safety implications for all women, 
particularly those who are pregnant, as the seatbelts worn by the dummy are not adapted to accommodate 
them. Over the past 100 years, workplaces in the UK have, on the whole, become considerably safer. 
Employers are legally required to provide well-maintained personal protective equipment, or PPE, anything 
from goggles to full bodysuits, to workers who need it, free of charge. But most PPE is designed to fit men. A 
recent report found that employers often think that when it comes to female workers, all they need to do to 
comply with this legal requirement is to buy jackets, for example, designed for a small man. The problem 
with this is that women can be tall and still have much smaller shoulders than the average man. Ill -fitting 
PPE such as high -vis jackets, vests and body armour can put women at risk. The report found that 95% of 
women said that their PPE often hampered their work and that this problem was worst in the emergency 
services. particularly the police. Another problem is related to comfort at work. A very common scenario in 

===== PAGE 102 =====
 
101 
 
offices in summertime is to see women wrapped in blankets or wearing sweaters while the air conditioning 
is on high. Meanwhile, the men are in shorts and T -shirts. This is due to differences in metabolic rates for 
men and women. There is a standard setting for air conditioning to be at a temperature of 21 degrees 
designed to suit men and in most modern offices it is not possible to turn the air conditioning up or down. 
This means that many offices which mainly employ women are wasting energy by having the air 
conditioning set too high. As you can see from the examples I've just mentioned, there are serious 
consequences for designs which don't consider the needs of all users.   

===== PAGE 103 =====
 
102 
 
TEST 4 
PART 1 
MAN 
 
Sandra, I seem to remember you had some family visitors staying with you recently 
WOMAN 
 
Yeah that right. My brother and his family were here a couple of months ago 
MAN 
 
OK, good. Well, I wanted to ask for your advice. I got my cousin and her family visiting next 
month and as I don't have kids, I've no idea where to take them. 
WOMAN 
 
Right. What about accommodation? Are they going to stay with you in your flat? 
MAN 
 
No, thankfully. There wouldn't be room. My cousin wants me to recommend a hotel. Do you 
know anywhere? 
WOMAN Yes, I do actually. I always recommend people stay at the King's Hotel. 
MAN Where's that near? 
WOMAN 
 
It's about a five minutes walk from Murray Station, so nice and central. It's actually on 
George Street. 
MAN Oh yes, I know. 
WOMAN 
I think they're on quite a tight budget, so how much roughly is it to stay there? If you book a 
family room, it's about £125 per night. My brother paid for two double rooms in the end, 
and I think that was around £95 for each room. 
MAN Oh, that's not too bad. 
WOMAN So how old are your cousins' kids? 
MAN 
 
Twelve and nine. So I want to organise some trips while they're here. I was thinking of doing 
a bus tour of the city centre, as none of them have been here before. 
WOMAN 
 
 
Those bus tours are quite expensive. I think it's better to do a walking tour. It gives you a 
much better feel for the city. There's one that starts from Colton Square. It takes a couple of 
hours and doesn't cost that much. 
MAN Sounds good. I'll look that up. Thanks. 
WOMAN 
 
If the weather's nice, one thing you could do is visit the old fort. You could get there by boat. 
The whole trip takes half a day. 
MAN 
 
That's a really good idea. I'd like to do that myself. And if the weather bad I was thinking 

===== PAGE 104 =====
 
103 
 
they could go to the science museum. But maybe they could do that when I at work 
WOMAN Yeah don forget it closed on Mondays 
MAN 
 
They here from Saturday for four nights so Tuesday would be best I think 
WOMAN 
 
And it won't be so crowded then. Saturdays are terrible. I took my kids to the exhibition on 
old computers there and it was far too crowded. I wanted to go back but it's finished now. 
MAN That's a shame. My cousin's kids would have enjoyed that. 
WOMAN 
 
There's another one starting soon on space, which looks really good too. 
MAN OK, well, I'll mention that to my cousin. 
Before you hear the rest of the conversation, you have some time to look at questions 7 to 10. Now listen 
and answer questions 7 to 10. 
WOMAN Have you thought about where to take them to eat? 
MAN 
 
Well, I really like all the food stalls at Clacton Market. My cousin's vegetarian. I know it's one 
of the best places for that kind of food. 
WOMAN 
 
Definitely, and there'll be loads of choices for the kids too. You need to get there quite early, 
though. At the weekend, most of the stores stop serving lunch at 2.30. 
MAN 
 
Good point. It's all going to need careful planning. My cousin said she'd love to take the kids 
to a show at the theatre, but tickets are so expensive. 
WOMAN 
 
I know. But you can get some good deals if you book online with bargained tickets for the 
following day. On some seats there a 75 discount 
MAN Really. I must try and get some 
WOMAN 
 
Yeah There are lots of things you can do for free as well. No need to spend a fortune. 
MAN Like what? 
WOMAN 
 
They're coming next month, right? Well, check and see if it's the same weekend as the Roots 
Music Festival in Blakewell Gardens. 
MAN R-O-O-T-S? 
WOMAN 
 
Yeah, check it out online. It's always a family-friendly event and there's no entry charge. 
MAN That sounds perfect. 

===== PAGE 105 =====
 
104 
 
WOMAN 
 
And if you're in Blakewell Gardens, climb Telegraph Hill. You'll be able to look right down on 
the port. Everyone's always really impressed because it's so huge. 
MAN 
 
Oh yeah, I've been meaning to do that for ages. I've heard the view's amazing. 
WOMAN Yeah, it's really worth the effort. 
MAN Well, that's given me loads of ideas. Thanks so much. 
PART 2 
Good morning and welcome to City Football Club. I'd like to give you some useful information about your 
visit to the stadium today and then we'll start the tour of the areas of the stadium that are open to visitors. I 
can see lots of children here today, so just to let mums and dads know a few things before we start. The 
stadium has lots of stairs and the players' tunnel is very dark. Please don't let your children wander off on 
their own, even for a minute. We don't want any accidents or anyone getting frightened. Cameras are 
permitted everywhere and you can take pictures of your child shooting a penalty. Assistants are helping to 
organise this and hopefully the queue won't be too long. It's very hot and sunny out on the pitch today. You 
can get food and drink at the cafe and I really recommend the healthy lunch boxes for children Also in the 
cafe children are invited to do a football drawing We pick the best one at the end of the afternoon so don 
forget to put your name and contact details on the back That way if you've left the stadium before then, 
we'll send your prize, but sadly we can't return drawings. I'd like to mention some features of the tour. We'll 
start with the 360 cinema experience, which has been very popular over the years, and then I'll take you to 
the players' dressing rooms, before going outside to the seating area and the pitch. I should say, if you'd 
prefer your visit to be self -guided, please collect headphones from the reception, and then you can listen to 
the pre -recorded information at your own speed. We've only just introduced this feature and would 
appreciate your feedback. We're thinking of offering tours in other languages in future, so if you have any 
thoughts on that, we'd welcome those too. If you plan to return another time, you might like to book one of 
our VIP tours. We've only just started offering these and they can be booked online. Now listen and answer 
questions 15 to 20 Now, the stadium you see today was built in 1989 as part of a three -year redevelopment 
project. While that project was going on, the team had to play its matches at the ground of another club. 
Apart from that, the club has been here on this site since 1870. As some of you may know, that was the start 
of a really important decade in the history of football in this country. For example, 1870 was also the year 
that football teams started to include a player whose role it was to guard the goal. It's hard to imagine what 
the game must have been like without someone in that position, isn't it? In 1872 and 73, many other clubs 

===== PAGE 106 =====
 
105 
 
were established, both here and abroad. And the following year, in 1874, referees were allowed to send 
players off if they committed certain offences. and also in that year teams started having to swap ends at 
half-time. One fact I was interested to discover was that in early football games the aim was for the scorer to 
get the ball between two flag posts and later between sticks joined at the top with a piece of tape. In 1875, 
that tape was replaced with the solid crossbar that we're familiar with today. 1877 saw the founding of 
further new clubs and the history books tell us that in the same year all the clubs decided to set a limit of 90 
minutes for each match Before that it was a more casual arrangement and this sometimes caused huge 
arguments and sometimes fights during matches when one team called the end of the game and the other 
team wanted to play on to try and score a winning goal. By 1878, the number of teams in the Football 
League increased again. In addition, referees started using whistles and electric lamps were installed on 
certain pitches. This was a significant change, as games could then be played in the evenings all year round. 
In 1880, clubs began to charge fans for admission to games, even though players were still amateurs and 
had other proper jobs. That's hard to imagine in the modern professional game. where top players earn 
significant sums of money from both playing and commercial activities.  
PART 3 
MAN How are you getting on with the assignment on handwriting? 
WOMAN 
Not too bad. You know, I hadn't realised that children benefit in so many ways from learning to 
write. It's such an important skill, and yet most people think handwriting is less important than 
in the past, because people hardly ever write by hand these days. 
MAN 
 
Yes, and all the evidence suggests children should learn to write by hand before they learn to 
type, not least because it helps their memory. 
WOMAN 
 
That's right. The physical act of writing helps children to remember letters. That seems pretty 
obvious when you think about it. 
MAN 
 
What's less obvious is how it helps develop their concentration. They have to sit still and focus 
on one thing. 
WOMAN Yeah, that aspect of handwriting had never occurred to me before. 
MAN 
 
Same here. I'm not sure I understand how it improves children's imagination, though. 
WOMAN 
 
Well there was that study which showed that primary age children generated more ideas 
when they were writing by hand than using a keyboard I would have guessed that would be 

===== PAGE 107 =====
 
106 
 
the case 
MAN 
 
Hmm yeah I never associated spatial awareness with handwriting either. I thought spatial 
awareness was more to do with knowing where you are in relation to objects or other people. 
WOMAN 
 
I thought that too. But good spatial awareness is essential for writing because you have to 
space words correctly. It's not just fine motor skills that improve through writing, as I'd always 
assumed. 
MAN 
Handwriting is so much harder for children with dyspraxia, who have problems coordinating 
movement. It's good there are lots of things you can do in the classroom to help them. They 
need so much more support with letter formation. You need to play lots of games to help them 
distinguish letter shapes. It takes a lot of patience. 
WOMAN 
 
Yeah, I like the idea of using one of those pens that lights up if you press too hard. That seems 
like a really simple solution. 
MAN 
Yes, absolutely. I'm not sure there's much you can do about children with dyspraxia writing 
very slowly. It's more important to focus on accuracy and as they get more confident, I think 
they eventually speed up. 
WOMAN 
 
One quite simple thing you can do is to use grid paper. So they write each letter in a box and 
that trains them to space the letters correctly. 
MAN 
 
Indeed, that's more important for legibility than trying to get them to write in a straight line. 
Before you hear the rest of the discussion, you have some time to look at questions 25 to 30. you. Now listen 
and answer questions 25 to 30. 
MAN 
 
For some children, it might be better to teach them to write on a laptop rather than by hand, 
like children with dyslexia. They often really struggle with handwriting and some just give up. 
WOMAN 
 
Yeah, it's not as frustrating for them if they get things wrong. On a keyboard, they can be more 
willing to have a go. But I read that developing fluency isn't any faster. 
MAN 
That's right. Did you read that article on the benefits of teaching print rather than cursive 
handwriting, where the letters are joined up? 
WOMAN 
Yes. Well, in the past, cursive writing was certainly considered more stylish and educated, but 
not anymore. Teachers' attitudes have changed because it's been proved that cursive is more 
difficult to learn, especially for children with learning difficulties who find joining up letters 

===== PAGE 108 =====
 
107 
 
really challenging. 
MAN 
I agree. I was always worried that my poor handwriting affected my exam results, and now 
research shows that I was right to worry. I'm sure a lot of students think it's unfair that they're 
being judged on their handwriting, not just their knowledge. 
WOMAN 
 
Marks are definitely affected if examiners can read the script. That is why it has always been so 
important to teach children to write legibly. Do you think the role of handwriting will change 
in the future 
MAN 
I can't see that changing much. Touch typing still isn't taught in most schools, which is a 
shame. But maybe that won't be necessary in the future, because people will also be able to 
write by hand on digital devices. Anyway, teachers understand the value of handwriting. It's a 
basic life skill. 
WOMAN 
 
True. However, the fact is that people are writing by hand less and less and relying on digital 
devices. That does cause some problems. 
MAN You mean like note-taking. There are lots of apps for that. 
WOMAN 
 
And for reading historical documents, apparently. But my mum is shocked by my awful 
spelling and the fact that my punctuation is really inconsistent. I think you can put that down 
to lack of practice. 
MAN 
I expect so. Personally, I miss writing by hand. I hardly ever write anything now. I remember my 
grandparents had such beautiful handwriting and it was so individual. Nobody I know would 
be able to identify my handwriting now. It's a shame. 
WOMAN 
 
I know. I feel the same way. I used to write a diary by hand and now I do that digitally. It just 
seems less effort to do it that way. So it's not just a problem... 
PART 4 
We've been looking at different types of conflicts that may arise between wildlife and humans at the 
boundaries of protected areas, such as national parks and animal sanctuaries. I'd like to illustrate this by 
telling you about some research that I've been involved in recently in the Central African country of Zambia 
in the area around the Chembe Bird Sanctuary which contains over 300 of the listed birds of Zambia These 
include a number of birds of prey such as eagles hawks and owls that live by hunting and killing other birds 
and animals Now most of the people living in the local communities near to the bird sanctuary are small -

===== PAGE 109 =====
 
108 
 
scale farmers and these birds of prey provide important social and ecological benefits to them. For 
example, a lot of damage can be caused to farmers' crops by rodents, such as rats, which would consume 
the crops as they grow in the fields, as well as after harvesting if they weren't hunted and killed by the birds. 
And the predatory habits of these birds also protect farmers in other ways. For example, a major danger to 
rural workers is snakes, whose bite may be dangerous or even fatal, and birds of prey have a major role in 
keeping their populations under control. Local people have always been aware of these benefits and for 
years, even before the sanctuary was opened in 1973, the birds played a key role in the culture of the region. 
However, more recently, the sanctuary and its birds have also become increasingly important to the 
community in economic terms, because at present, after a relatively slow start, tourism has become an 
important source of revenue for them. However, although these birds of prey are protected by the 
government, their numbers are falling. Some of these deaths are accidental. Fatalities occur when birds 
alight on roads to catch and eat their prey, and are hit by fast moving traffic. Drivers in Zambia have to take 
special care at night, as birds may regard the quieter roads as safe places to sleep. Accidental deaths may 
also occur if these birds fly close to high power lines as they may be electrocuted This is a particular danger 
in the heavy rain which can occur in the region in the months from December to April And local farmers also 
pose a threat to these birds. As well as growing crops, small -scale farmers in the area also rear chickens. 
These provide food for the farmers' families, as well as being an important source of income. But they're 
also an easy target for birds of prey, and so farmers may shoot these birds, which is illegal but 
understandable, or they may poison the birds, which again is illegal and can have negative effects on the 
ecosystem. So how else can farmers protect their chickens from birds of prey? Some people believe that to 
prevent the predators from settling near the area where the chickens are kept, it's best to keep this area 
free from vegetation. But in fact, this is counterproductive, as it means the chickens have no cover to hide in 
and they'll be easier for the birds to see. Another possibility would be to prevent the chickens from going 
outside at all and to keep them safe from predators inside a building, but this would cost far too much to be 
a practical solution. Nearly all the farmers reported that they spent a lot of time and effort trying to frighten 
off the birds of prey without actually harming them. Most of the farmers had at least one dog and said this 
was a big help at scaring away the predators. Some of the farmers also reported that during the breeding 
season, when the chickens were particularly vulnerable, they encouraged their children to watch over the 
chickens and to hit pans with a metal spoon so that the resulting noise would succeed in driving away birds 
that were trying to seize the young chicks None of these methods was 100 effective so as a result the village 
people told us that rather than just using one method, they were forced to use a combination for them to 

===== PAGE 110 =====
 
109 
 
have any effect. And even so, these birds of prey remain a major threat to the chickens' survival and cause 
considerable economic loss to farmers. So we looked at the possibility of a longer-term solution to...   

